README
================

### Main Functions

The main functions is `patp_test()` and `get_data()`. `get_data()` is a
function to create an example dataset.

### Dependencies

`patp_test()` requires the R packages `survival` and `matrixStats` to be
installed and loaded.`get_data()` requires the R packages `truncdist`
and `extraDistr` to be installed and loaded.

### Input data

The input data need to be a data frame in the long format generated by
`get_data()`. The data frame should contain the variables

-   `id`: variable name that identifies the individual observations.
-   `cid`: variable name that identifies the clusters.
-   `from`: the state of the process at Tstart. The possible values are
    1,…,k.
-   `Tstart`: starting time of the interval in the record.
-   `Tstop`: ending time of the interval in record.
-   `trans`: an integer that uniquely identifies the transition.
-   `status`: indicator variable. If status=1, the corresponding
    transition has been observed.
-   `group`: variable name of the binary grouping variable.

### Function `sopt_test()`

The function `sopt_test()` calculates the p-value for the comparison of
the population-averaged transition probability
*P**r*(*X*(*t*) = *j*\|*X*(*s*) = *h*) between two groups, using a
linear test or Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. The function performs has
following arguments:

-   `data`: a data.frame in the long format follows `get_data()`
    requirements.
-   `tmat`: a matrix of indicator transitions between states of the
    process where different transitions are identified by TRUE or FALSE.
-   `id`: variable name that identifies the individual observations.
-   `cid`: variable name that identifies the clusters.
-   `group`: variable name of the binary grouping variable.
-   `j`: the state j in *P**r*(*X*(*t*) = *j*\|*X*(*s*) = *h*).
-   `B`: number of nonparametric cluster bootstrap replications. The
    default value is 1000.
-   `method`: “linear” or “KS”.

### Example

The artificial dataset contains clustered observations from an
illness-death process without recovery . The matrix `tmatrix` of
possible transition looks as follows.

``` r
tmatrix <- trans(state_names = c("health", "illness", "death"),from = c( 1, 1, 2, 2),
                 to = c(2, 3, 3, 1))
tmatrix
```

    ##         health illness death
    ## health   FALSE    TRUE  TRUE
    ## illness   TRUE   FALSE  TRUE
    ## death    FALSE   FALSE FALSE

The following example data has 10 clusters:

    ##   cid id    Tstart     Tstop from to Z R group
    ## 1   1  1 0.0000000 0.1315225    1  2 0 1     0
    ## 2   1  1 0.1315225 0.3154674    2  3 0 1     0
    ## 3   1  2 0.0000000 0.4189244    1  3 0 1     0
    ## 4   1  3 0.0000000 0.4867005    1  2 0 1     0
    ## 5   1  3 0.4867005 0.9478138    2  1 0 1     0
    ## 6   1  3 0.9478138 0.9860794    1  3 0 1     0

Two-sample comparison of the transition probability
*P*(*X*(*t*) = 2\|*X*(0) = 1) between the groups defined by the variable
group can be performed as follows

For linear test:

``` r
set.seed(1234)
sopt_test(data = tdat, tmat = tmatrix, cid = "cid",
          id = "id", group = "group", j = 2, B = 1000,
          method = "linear")
```

    ## p-value at State2 
    ##         0.1369707

For Kolmogorov–Smirnov test:

``` r
set.seed(1234)
sopt_test(data = tdat, tmat = tmatrix, cid = "cid", 
          id = "id", group = "group", j = 2, B = 1000,
          method = "KS")
```

    ## p-value at State2 
    ##             0.251

It is recommended to use at least 1000 cluster bootstrap replications
when performing two-sample hypothesis testing.
